README.md, before:

## Support & Donations

If you find this project helpful, consider supporting it!

[Donate via PayPal](https://www.paypal.com/paypalme/revrari)

# My Whisper - Speech-to-Text for Emacs

A simple Emacs package that provides speech-to-text functionality using Whisper.cpp. Record audio directly from Emacs and have it transcribed and inserted at your cursor position.

## Demo Video

[![Perfect Speech to Text in Emacs](https://img.youtube.com/vi/bTU9ctFtyBA/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/bTU9ctFtyBA)

**[Perfect Speech to Text in Emacs](https://youtu.be/bTU9ctFtyBA)** - See the package in action!

## Features

- Record audio with simple key bindings
- Two transcription modes:
  - **Fast mode** (`C-c n`): Uses base.en model for quick transcription
  - **Accurate mode** (`C-c v`): Uses medium.en model for more accurate results
- **Vocabulary hints**: Provide a custom vocabulary file to improve recognition of proper nouns and specialized terms (e.g., Greek names like Socrates, Alcibiades, Diotima)
- Automatic transcription using Whisper.cpp
- Text insertion at cursor position
- Non-blocking recording with user-controlled stop

## Prerequisites

Before setting up this package, you need to install the following system dependencies:

### 1. Sox (for audio recording)

**Ubuntu/Debian:**
```bash
sudo apt install sox
```

**macOS:**
```bash
brew install sox
```

**Arch Linux:**
```bash
sudo pacman -S sox
```

### 2. Whisper.cpp

Clone and build Whisper.cpp:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp.git
cd whisper.cpp

# Build the project
make

# Download models
# For fast mode (required)
bash ./models/download-ggml-model.sh base.en

# For accurate mode (required)
bash ./models/download-ggml-model.sh medium.en
```

Make sure the paths in the code match your installation:
- Whisper binary: `~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli`
- Fast mode model: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin`
- Accurate mode model: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin`

If you install Whisper.cpp in a different location, you'll need to update the paths in `my-whisper.el`.

## Installation

### Option 1: Manual Installation

1. Clone or download this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <your-repo-url> ~/.emacs.d/my-whisper
   ```

2. Add the following to your `init.el` or `.emacs` file:
   ```elisp
   ;; Add the package directory to load-path
   (add-to-list 'load-path "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper")

   ;; Load the package
   (require 'my-whisper)
   ```

### Option 2: Direct File Installation

1. Copy `my-whisper.el` to your Emacs configuration directory:
   ```bash
   cp my-whisper.el ~/.emacs.d/
   ```

2. Add the following to your `init.el`:
   ```elisp
   ;; Load the whisper package
   (load-file "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper.el")
   ```

### Option 3: Using use-package

If you use `use-package`, add this to your `init.el`:

```elisp
(use-package my-whisper
  :load-path "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper"
  :bind (("C-c v" . run-whisper-stt)
         ("C-c n" . run-whisper-stt-fast)))
```

## Usage

### Key Bindings

- **`C-c n`**: Fast mode (base.en model) - quicker transcription, suitable for most use cases
- **`C-c v`**: Accurate mode (medium.en model) - slower but more accurate transcription

### Basic Workflow

1. **Start recording**: Press `C-c n` (fast) or `C-c v` (accurate) to begin recording audio
2. **Stop recording**: Press `C-g` to stop recording and start transcription
3. **Get results**: The transcribed text will be automatically inserted at your cursor position

### Example

1. Open any text buffer in Emacs
2. Position your cursor where you want the transcribed text
3. Press `C-c n` for fast transcription or `C-c v` for accurate transcription
4. Speak into your microphone
5. Press `C-g` when finished speaking
6. Wait a moment for transcription to complete
7. The text appears at your cursor position

## Configuration

### Custom Key Bindings

To change the key bindings, modify your `init.el`:

```elisp
;; Use different key bindings
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c s") 'run-whisper-stt-fast)  ; Fast mode
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c S") 'run-whisper-stt)       ; Accurate mode
```

### Custom Model Path

To use a different model for accurate mode, set the `whisper-model-path` variable in your `init.el`:

```elisp
;; Use a different model (e.g., large model for even better accuracy)
(setq whisper-model-path "~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-large.en.bin")
```

### Custom Paths

If your Whisper.cpp installation is in a different location, you'll need to modify the paths in `my-whisper.el`:

```elisp
;; Example: if whisper-cli is in /usr/local/bin/
;; Edit the format strings in my-whisper.el from:
;; "~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin ..."
;; to:
;; "/usr/local/bin/whisper-cli -m /path/to/your/model.bin ..."
```

### Custom Vocabulary for Proper Nouns

To improve transcription accuracy for proper nouns, technical terms, or specialized vocabulary, create a vocabulary file at `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`. This is especially useful for:

- Classical names (Greek, Latin, etc.)
- Technical jargon
- Domain-specific terminology
- Uncommon proper nouns

**Recommended format:** Natural contextual sentences work best. Whisper recognizes vocabulary better when proper nouns appear in context rather than simple lists. Place your most critical/difficult words toward the end of the prompt for maximum effect.

**Example `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`:**
```
This transcription discusses classical Greek philosophy and biblical studies, including scholars and figures such as Thrasymachus, Eryximachus, Chaerephon, Glaucon, Adeimantus, Socrates, Plato, Diotima, Alcibiades, Phaedrus, Aristophanes, Agathon, Pausanias, Critias, Apollos, Priscilla, and Aquila.
```

Or for technical discussions:
```
The following is a conversation about software development using tools like Emacs, discussing programming languages, frameworks, and technical terms.
```

**Quick start:** Copy the sample vocabulary file included in this repository:
```bash
cp sample-whisper-vocabulary.txt ~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt
```

Then edit `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt` to include contextual sentences with the specific proper nouns and terms you use regularly.

**Format tips:**
- **Use natural sentences** that provide context (not just comma-separated lists)
- **Place difficult/critical words near the end** - the last ~5 words have the most influence on recognition
- **Keep total length under 224 tokens** (approximately 150 words maximum) - anything beyond this limit will be truncated
- Longer prompts are more reliable than very short ones, but don't exceed the token limit
- Line breaks don't matter - use multiple sentences or paragraphs as you prefer

**Custom vocabulary location:**
By default, the package looks for `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`. To use a different location, set the variable in your `init.el`:

```elisp
(setq whisper-vocabulary-file "~/Documents/my-vocabulary.txt")
```

**Note:** The vocabulary feature works with both fast and accurate transcription modes. Vocabulary hints improve recognition but are not guaranteed - transcription accuracy also depends on audio quality and the model used. For best results with difficult proper nouns, use the accurate mode (C-c v) with the medium.en model.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **"sox: command not found"**
   - Install sox using your system package manager

2. **"whisper-cli: command not found"**
   - Ensure Whisper.cpp is built and the path is correct
   - Check that `~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli` exists

3. **No audio recorded**
   - Check your microphone permissions
   - Test sox manually: `sox -d -r 16000 -c 1 -b 16 test.wav`

4. **Transcription not working**
   - Verify the model files exist:
     - Fast mode: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin`
     - Accurate mode: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin`
   - Test whisper-cli manually with a wav file

### Testing the Setup

Test each component individually:

```bash
# Test sox recording (record 5 seconds)
sox -d -r 16000 -c 1 -b 16 test.wav trim 0 5

# Test whisper transcription (fast mode)
~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin -f test.wav

# Test whisper transcription (accurate mode)
~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin -f test.wav
```

## How It Works

1. **Recording**: Uses `sox` to record audio at 16kHz, mono, 16-bit
2. **Processing**: Calls `whisper-cli` with the recorded audio file
3. **Integration**: Captures the output and inserts it into your Emacs buffer
4. **Cleanup**: Automatically cleans up temporary files and buffers

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.

## Contributing

Feel free to submit issues and pull requests to improve this package.# my-whisper

Commit message:

Add word count warning to whisper--get-vocabulary-prompt function

README.md, after:

## Support & Donations

If you find this project helpful, consider supporting it!

[Donate via PayPal](https://www.paypal.com/paypalme/revrari)

# My Whisper - Speech-to-Text for Emacs

A simple Emacs package that provides speech-to-text functionality using Whisper.cpp. Record audio directly from Emacs and have it transcribed and inserted at your cursor position.

## Demo Video

[![Perfect Speech to Text in Emacs](https://img.youtube.com/vi/bTU9ctFtyBA/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/bTU9ctFtyBA)

**[Perfect Speech to Text in Emacs](https://youtu.be/bTU9ctFtyBA)** - See the package in action!

## Features

- Record audio with simple key bindings
- Two transcription modes:
  - **Fast mode** (`C-c n`): Uses base.en model for quick transcription
  - **Accurate mode** (`C-c v`): Uses medium.en model for more accurate results
- **Vocabulary hints**: Provide a custom vocabulary file to improve recognition of proper nouns and specialized terms (e.g., Greek names like Socrates, Alcibiades, Diotima)
- Automatic transcription using Whisper.cpp
- Text insertion at cursor position
- Non-blocking recording with user-controlled stop

## Prerequisites

Before setting up this package, you need to install the following system dependencies:

### 1. Sox (for audio recording)

**Ubuntu/Debian:**
```bash
sudo apt install sox
```

**macOS:**
```bash
brew install sox
```

**Arch Linux:**
```bash
sudo pacman -S sox
```

### 2. Whisper.cpp

Clone and build Whisper.cpp:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp.git
cd whisper.cpp

# Build the project
make

# Download models
# For fast mode (required)
bash ./models/download-ggml-model.sh base.en

# For accurate mode (required)
bash ./models/download-ggml-model.sh medium.en
```

Make sure the paths in the code match your installation:
- Whisper binary: `~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli`
- Fast mode model: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin`
- Accurate mode model: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin`

If you install Whisper.cpp in a different location, you'll need to update the paths in `my-whisper.el`.

## Installation

### Option 1: Manual Installation

1. Clone or download this repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <your-repo-url> ~/.emacs.d/my-whisper
   ```

2. Add the following to your `init.el` or `.emacs` file:
   ```elisp
   ;; Add the package directory to load-path
   (add-to-list 'load-path "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper")

   ;; Load the package
   (require 'my-whisper)
   ```

### Option 2: Direct File Installation

1. Copy `my-whisper.el` to your Emacs configuration directory:
   ```bash
   cp my-whisper.el ~/.emacs.d/
   ```

2. Add the following to your `init.el`:
   ```elisp
   ;; Load the whisper package
   (load-file "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper.el")
   ```

### Option 3: Using use-package

If you use `use-package`, add this to your `init.el`:

```elisp
(use-package my-whisper
  :load-path "~/.emacs.d/my-whisper"
  :bind (("C-c v" . run-whisper-stt)
         ("C-c n" . run-whisper-stt-fast)))
```

## Usage

### Key Bindings

- **`C-c n`**: Fast mode (base.en model) - quicker transcription, suitable for most use cases
- **`C-c v`**: Accurate mode (medium.en model) - slower but more accurate transcription

### Basic Workflow

1. **Start recording**: Press `C-c n` (fast) or `C-c v` (accurate) to begin recording audio
2. **Stop recording**: Press `C-g` to stop recording and start transcription
3. **Get results**: The transcribed text will be automatically inserted at your cursor position

### Example

1. Open any text buffer in Emacs
2. Position your cursor where you want the transcribed text
3. Press `C-c n` for fast transcription or `C-c v` for accurate transcription
4. Speak into your microphone
5. Press `C-g` when finished speaking
6. Wait a moment for transcription to complete
7. The text appears at your cursor position

## Configuration

### Custom Key Bindings

To change the key bindings, modify your `init.el`:

```elisp
;; Use different key bindings
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c s") 'run-whisper-stt-fast)  ; Fast mode
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c S") 'run-whisper-stt)       ; Accurate mode
```

### Custom Model Path

To use a different model for accurate mode, set the `whisper-model-path` variable in your `init.el`:

```elisp
;; Use a different model (e.g., large model for even better accuracy)
(setq whisper-model-path "~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-large.en.bin")
```

### Custom Paths

If your Whisper.cpp installation is in a different location, you'll need to modify the paths in `my-whisper.el`:

```elisp
;; Example: if whisper-cli is in /usr/local/bin/
;; Edit the format strings in my-whisper.el from:
;; "~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin ..."
;; to:
;; "/usr/local/bin/whisper-cli -m /path/to/your/model.bin ..."
```

### Custom Vocabulary for Proper Nouns

To improve transcription accuracy for proper nouns, technical terms, or specialized vocabulary, create a vocabulary file at `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`. This is especially useful for:

- Classical names (Greek, Latin, etc.)
- Technical jargon
- Domain-specific terminology
- Uncommon proper nouns

**Recommended format:** Natural contextual sentences work best. Whisper recognizes vocabulary better when proper nouns appear in context rather than simple lists. Place your most critical/difficult words toward the end of the prompt for maximum effect.

**Example `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`:**
```
This transcription discusses classical Greek philosophy and biblical studies, including scholars and figures such as Thrasymachus, Eryximachus, Chaerephon, Glaucon, Adeimantus, Socrates, Plato, Diotima, Alcibiades, Phaedrus, Aristophanes, Agathon, Pausanias, Critias, Apollos, Priscilla, and Aquila.
```

Or for technical discussions:
```
The following is a conversation about software development using tools like Emacs, discussing programming languages, frameworks, and technical terms.
```

**Quick start:** Copy the sample vocabulary file included in this repository:
```bash
cp sample-whisper-vocabulary.txt ~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt
```

Then edit `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt` to include contextual sentences with the specific proper nouns and terms you use regularly.

**Format tips:**
- **Use natural sentences** that provide context (not just comma-separated lists)
- **Place difficult/critical words near the end** - the last ~5 words have the most influence on recognition
- **Keep total length under 224 tokens** (approximately 150 words maximum) - anything beyond this limit will be truncated by Whisper
- Longer prompts are more reliable than very short ones, but don't exceed the token limit
- Line breaks don't matter - use multiple sentences or paragraphs as you prefer
- The package will warn you if your vocabulary file exceeds 150 words when you start recording

**Custom vocabulary location:**
By default, the package looks for `~/.emacs.d/whisper-vocabulary.txt`. To use a different location, set the variable in your `init.el`:

```elisp
(setq whisper-vocabulary-file "~/Documents/my-vocabulary.txt")
```

**Note:** The vocabulary feature works with both fast and accurate transcription modes. Vocabulary hints improve recognition but are not guaranteed - transcription accuracy also depends on audio quality and the model used. For best results with difficult proper nouns, use the accurate mode (C-c v) with the medium.en model.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **"sox: command not found"**
   - Install sox using your system package manager

2. **"whisper-cli: command not found"**
   - Ensure Whisper.cpp is built and the path is correct
   - Check that `~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli` exists

3. **No audio recorded**
   - Check your microphone permissions
   - Test sox manually: `sox -d -r 16000 -c 1 -b 16 test.wav`

4. **Transcription not working**
   - Verify the model files exist:
     - Fast mode: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin`
     - Accurate mode: `~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin`
   - Test whisper-cli manually with a wav file

### Testing the Setup

Test each component individually:

```bash
# Test sox recording (record 5 seconds)
sox -d -r 16000 -c 1 -b 16 test.wav trim 0 5

# Test whisper transcription (fast mode)
~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-base.en.bin -f test.wav

# Test whisper transcription (accurate mode)
~/whisper.cpp/build/bin/whisper-cli -m ~/whisper.cpp/models/ggml-medium.en.bin -f test.wav
```

## How It Works

1. **Recording**: Uses `sox` to record audio at 16kHz, mono, 16-bit
2. **Processing**: Calls `whisper-cli` with the recorded audio file
3. **Integration**: Captures the output and inserts it into your Emacs buffer
4. **Cleanup**: Automatically cleans up temporary files and buffers

## License

This project is released under the MIT License.

## Contributing

Feel free to submit issues and pull requests to improve this package.# my-whisper
